Commentary on *Transcending Ego: Distinguishing Consciousness from Wisdom*
May 14, 2025  

Dawai: Let's go back to Rangjung Yeshé Dorje, the 3rd Karmapa's text here in Thrangu Rinpoche's commentary, because this is exactly what makes this style, this group, a little bit different—is that we get into the mechanics of our experience. We don't leave all that vague.

And so if you consider that 95% of our reality—like this dark energy, dark matter that they're speaking of—is invisible, then it's quite logical to assume that we can embrace the *I don’t know* mind. You see? That we can allow for revelation.

According to Fred Luskin at Stanford—those are the stats I like to cite anyway—there's about 50,000 thoughts that you're having per day, and the average person knows up to 50,000 words, okay? It could be much less or much more depending on circumstances. But that's not a lot—you don't want to confine your entire mind to those 50,000 words and those 50,000 thoughts. Alright? When you fact check me on that, understand that these numbers vary and I did an estimate based on different sources. Okay?  

So very good to know though, that you have this mind that's quite expansive. It knows words that you have not learned yet. It knows concepts that you have not developed yet. All kinds of things like that, okay?  

Yesterday we were talking about the hypnagogic and the hypnopompic states, and how we can kind of freeze those states. Those are intermediate states, as you're falling asleep—I think that's the hypnagogic state. And then as you're waking up, it's the hypnopompic state. Those are essentially bardos.  

And in those bardos you can learn a lot about your mind. You can see how emotions and thoughts melt together to make a dream. You can see how dreams are very random—like AI pictures—they'll have random artifacts and hallucinations. 

And when you start to see this, the whole world is actually pretty strange too. It's actually like an AI as well, but we've sort of normalized the magic of it. Like just look at cats. Would a really structured reality have cats? Come on. This is a dream-like magical trip. 

Reading chat: Cats are the proof. [laughing]

I guess I'm just really making the point here to allow your intellectual mind to relax a little bit... It's like this child that thinks it knows everything. I shouldn't say child— children get too much of the blame, It's like this little dictator that thinks it knows everything.

Oh my goodness, I've seen people trying to school the Dalai Lama, trying to school Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche because they know more than them. You know? And I get it—we want to be independent, we want to be free and powerful, but we also can embrace our humility.

I love it when people school me on science and dharmas. Like I used to work with inventors on a daily basis at Photonic Systems, a physical optics corporation, as an art director, so I got to see how they're inventing things every day, how they're fumbling around trying to allow the invention to come to them. And I saw the difference between those who are just overthinking it and stuck in this, you know, anyway, be careful who you're talking to. The quietest person, the most unassuming person could know a world more than you. So just to start preaching at people and trying to school them—to me, it's icky. You know, it’s icky.

You share with somebody awareness practice—it should be like friends talking. “I saw my thoughts fly by today. It didn't even upset me. It was so awesome.” And then what if you said, “Man, that's actually not self-liberation. Self-liberation would have been you didn't even see it fly in the first place, and I’ve got to school you on this and teach you real Dzogchen.” Okay? I mean, this is kind of unnecessary. [laughing]

So let yourself be humble. Let yourself have the ****I don’t know*** mind. We are all students. We are all teachers. If the first thing your mind says is, “No, no, no, I'm not a teacher,” that's just more ego. That's just you trying to be humble—overly humble. You *are* a teacher. There are many circumstances where you're the teacher, and many circumstances where you're the student. And so this is just a little heart advice coming out. I also have dealt with these struggles, okay, my friends. But let's see what the verses are saying here today. Oh yes., very good. 

And so we're essentially talking about bridging a gap here between Tögal practices—dealing with light and appearances and mind. Right? Once you've been introduced to Tögal, and you see the bindus, and you start to see, “Oh, my mind is actually also reality,” then Trekchö will cut through the Tögal essentially, as you abandon Trekchö and Tögal—because there's only pure abiding after that. You're not really cutting through anything—there's self-liberation of the environment and your mind happening simultaneously. Like Longchenpa says: *"Mind resolves itself within phenomena, and phenomena resolve themselves within mind."* 

How does that happen? Just by letting be. That's the unbinding that we're talking about. So in this environment right now, you have little hooks. Your mind is hooked into different things. They're not even here with us in this group, but your mind is hooked into these different things in your environment, so that's what's getting resolved—you're crystallizing. You're reifying. You're solidifying this and creating stories and isolations. Right? I think you got it. So it says...

>8. Therefore, all these various appearances,
Do not exist as sensory objects which are other than consciousness.
Their arising is like the experience of self-knowledge.
All appearances, from indivisible particles to vast forms, are mind.
This means, that if nothing exists externally and separately,
Brahma and the rest, could not be creators.

Dawai: Yeah, it's just such a wonderful passage there. It talks about the self-knowing aspect of awareness. And remember this was quite a long time ago, so they pretty much believed in atoms and particles. Some people during these times believed they were solidly existing things. But now, in our modern science, we're starting to find out that these particles actually don't exist either. That's just more waves and impressions and imprints—just like the yogis have been saying for thousands of years.

So then also it's talking about divinity being at home right here in our minds—to me, this is very, very important. If we're constantly thinking that some other person is in charge of our reality, then we never get our own power.

For example, I brought up sovereignty. When you are free of your conditioning, you have sovereignty. And one of my neighbors—who insists on coming over [laughing]—said to me, “You don't have sovereignty. Only God has sovereignty. You have no sovereignty, God is your Ruler." And I was like, “No, I just mean you're free because you're with God now.” [neighbor says] “No, God is your owner. You don't have any freedom.” And I was really impressed by how he's given away all of his sovereignty. 

Now it is actually criminal—it has been criminal—to entertain the possibility of your own sovereignty. If you go up to many Judeo-Christian or Islamic practitioners and tell them that *your mind is the creato*r, they will chastise you. They will immediately assume you're assuming the position of God. Is that making sense? This is out there. It's very important that you don’t limit yourself by these kinds of constraints. 

If you take back any power of your mind, the new sort of paradigm is that you're disciplined for that. You're not supposed to take back your mind. You're not supposed to be the All Creator. You're not supposed to be sovereign, God is supposed to rule over you. And who is God? God is what our YouTube videos are telling you God is., God is what our preachers are telling you what God is. So you never even get to find out what God is for yourself because some preacher is telling you this is what God is, and you've got to believe my rendition of what God is. 

And you see, so you never ever find God because you're believing what somebody else is telling you is God. And then when you try to go into your own mind, they tell you you're not allowed to do that—that's satanistic to go into your own mind, that's evil. You see? And so we get stuck in a dualistic, disempowered environment. Subscribe to somebody else's dream.

So let's see what Thrangu Rinpoche's commentary says on this source verse. It says...

>When we learn that external objects are only mind, and are not separately existing things, we might answer, “Well, I can see them. They are made out of matter; therefore, they are different from mind, which is not made up of matter but has the quality of clarity or awareness.” To refute this argument we can use the previous example of a hand. We say, “Oh, I see a hand.”

Isn't that ironic, everybody see the synchronicity? [laughing] Yeah. Isn't that crazy? Yeah, that's just like superficial synchronicities, but it's fun to see them, because then these are multilayered. 

>We say, “Oh, I see a hand.” But if we investigate more closely, we see a thumb, an index finger, a middle finger, ring finger, and a little finger, skin, flesh, and bones. We then ask, “Where is this hand that I see?” In fact, the hand is just a conceptual fabrication. We then look at the thumb and say, “I see a thumb.” But the thumb consists of the first, second, and third joints, and so on, and therefore, also is made up of many different parts. We know that none of these parts are the thumb, and ask, “Well, where is the thumb?” There is only one answer: there is no actual thumb. We see something and think we see a hand, but in fact there is no real hand there. It is only a conceptual fabrication coming from the mind. The same analysis applies to the fingers, a mountain, a house, or to any other external object.

Yeah, so what do you see when you see a hand? You see essentially an aggregate within empty space kind of stuck together by electricity. Very nice. Yes—mind is there, we can verify that—that's the one thing we can verify. And it goes on:

>An explanation of the line in the verse which says “Their arising is like the experience of self-knowledge” will be given next. We may hold the position that all external phenomena are composed of collections of real, minute particles and these indivisible particles are gathered together to make the external phenomena that we perceive.


Now remember for example, in some of these modern theories like Donald Hoffman, which is a great rabbithole to take, where he says "after much testing and experimentation, we've concluded that the chances of natural selection being a true reflection of reality are virtually zero." So *virtually zero* that our reality is a true reflection of the true nature of reality. So we are indeed, according to many theories and much science and much Dharma, we are sort of hallucinating a proprietary reality to appease our desires, our physicality. So modern science isn't disagreeing that we have a proprietary reality based on our desires, actually in the past years we've been able to harmonize that in a profound way. So it says:

>When we, however, examine these small particles more closely, we find that we cannot divide them into the smallest particle because each particle can be divided into still smaller particle because each particle can be divided into still smaller particles.

And remember this is an older text, particles now are divided into like quantum fields—it's just movement, it's not even anything there. And it says:

>So there is no such thing as a particle that everything is made up of, and there is no reality in this external phenomena. So we must conclude that all external appearances arise from mind.`

>We will never find an external object separate from our mind. We see things as being separate because since the beginning of time, which we have spent in samsara, we've been habituated to the idea that phenomenon exists externally.

You see that kind of answers that inquiry too at the beginning there: Why can't there just be liberation right away, instant enlightenment?

Well, there could be if we didn't have these habituations over long periods of time—this plasticity, the imprinting that's been going on. It's like we typed in commands into the great command line—you know, the computer is now processing our commands. What do you expect, right? [laughing] 

Responding to chat: I had a feeling you would like that one. The great Unix command line—It's just a little dash waiting for you to type something. That's the pure presence, you know. Pure presence is just no operating system.

Dawai: All right. Very good. And like I always say, you know, with computers and AI—especially now quantum computing, which is non-dual, it's non-binary for once—the fact that computers have been binary has always been a little bit of a hindrance for us, right? But now with quantum computing, which is scary for people because I feel like they're finding stuff that they're not really telling people about, like weird anomalies and things like that. Now it's getting more non-dual, we're just creating our minds. Even the car—the car was just a rudimentary sort of manifestation of our mind—a painting, a drawing, anything—we're constantly building and reflecting our mind within itself.

And by the way, to me this is so much more rational, so much more logic to assume that our mind is, It doesn't even have to… we don't even have to speculate that it's the primary creator in a collective environment, collectively creating an environment. But it plays a huge role in the creation of our environment, even according to psychology, cognitive science, everything.

So this repositions us as a people, as humanity, as beings. We start to be less enticed by the external presentation and start to come home into the very source. You have to understand how this is going to shift humanity. You know? I'm not saying it's going to happen with this group or whatever, but I'm 100% sure we're going into such a Satya Yuga—into a golden age. Despite what these intoxicated world leaders are telling us and their apocalyptic staging, I believe we're headed into a golden age anyway. So yeah, anyway, I would probably go pretty deep on that. I'll read a little bit more here.

Notice Rinpoche's explanations are a little bit more elaborate, which is great. He is one of my favorite teachers, actually—Thrangu Rinpoche. I got to see him in Crestone and study with him there. A really amazing teacher who passed recently.

But what else is happening when we start to embrace our mind’s involvement in reality? You start to entertain the possibility, okay? That's what makes you very educated, in my opinion—when you can be pliant, when you can drop your point for the sake of compassion, when you can be flexible enough to entertain other people's points. And so now you're flexible—now you're resting in revelation rather than imputation, and you're able to have this world be in that perspective within your mind. Whole different feeling, it feels right.

Right, everybody? You all are yogis, you all are great practitioners, it feels more right when we assume that our mind is in this. And then we lose the ethics out of it, or the morality that we impute on ourselves. Like yes, your mind is hugely responsible for creation, but don't judge yourself for that. Don't beat yourself up and say, “Oh, I'm such a bad person because I created a shit sandwich,” and da-da-da. You know, it's not like that. Just begin to notice the creative power. And, maybe there's an immaturity there—we created a little bit of a mess, right? And that mess was necessary, it wasn't really messy, actually; It was for our wisdom and for maturity.

So these are great topics. That's why I love this book so much. It inspires a lot of great discussion. And it says:

>We see things as being separate, …

Yeah because of that habituation, that inertia, as (name of Sangha) was putting it.

>Many traditions say that the world and all beings inhabiting it were created by Brahma, Shiva, and Vishnu; …`

Or in Judeo Christianity—Yeshua, or whatever terms you want to have for God.

By the way, Brahma, Shiva, and Vishnu are personifications of the mind. They're meant to represent aspects of your own mind, just like _The Kunjed Gyalpo_, but they have been externalized and turned into external deities, disempowering the practitioners.

>… they mistakenly assert that gods created the smallest particles which we might call atoms. However, everything we experience, whether pleasant or unpleasant arises from our mind through the power of our karma, and is not created by gods.

Alright very good, it looks like we're going to go into the sixth consciousness, then the explanation of the mental consciousness next.

And thank you Yeshé, I appreciate you, you did a wonderful job there. And to all these practitioners, I appreciate your practice all the time and your sincerity. Those of you who have said very kind things to me and shown appreciation to me—that's very nice of you. I'm humbled by that, and I feel the same way about you. I highly revere you as awakened beings, as pure energy, as pure consciousness. No matter what our minds start to make up, please don't lose that about each other. We're all Buddhists here. 

And even these politicians—everybody—they are Buddhas, and they deserve compassion. They have been missed, they've been abused, they've been hypnotized, they've been programmed. So even those world leaders right now, in charge of Russia and Israel and America and all this money, they're just beings that need compassion. The whole world is hating them right now, and that's not helping, okay? So I encourage you to be radical about having compassion and really see the depth in those people. They probably have had very, very little love in their life. Okay? A lot of these world leaders and very powerful people have had very little love in their life, and materialism has taken them over. Okay?

And you can mention their names in here. I specifically don't mention their names just in case people are sensitive, but you can. I don't know, everybody's mind is different, I'm not going to put anything in your head. That makes sense, yeah? You just see the whole human in these people. Okay, yeah. Thank you, too. I really appreciate you all. 

And so we'll take a moment of silence here to end the session today. These gatherings are considered very powerful. Any good that we stirred up today, any realizations—there are beings in this very presence that are suffering, and we dedicate it all to them.

Deep bow to you, everybody. Have a beautiful day. Okay. Take care.


Ref: 
Transcending Ego: Distinguishing Consciousness from Wisdom (tib. *namshe yeshe gepa*)  
rangjung dorje, the 3rd karmapa  
Thrangu Rinpoche, 2001  

#archive("May 14, 2025", "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1imaECw2EVU")


#archive_minimal("May 14, 2025", "Distinguishing Consciousness...", "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1imaECw2EVU")